## GEF-6 REQUEST FOR Chemicals and Wastes ENABLING ACTIVITY PROPOSAL FOR FUNDING UNDER THE GEF Trust Fund

For more information about GFF, visit TheGEEOrg

### PARTI PROJECT IDENTIFIERS

|Project Title:|Minamata Convention: Initial assessment in the Republic of Sudan|
|---|---|
|Country(ies):|Sudan|
|GEF Agency(ies):|UNIDO (selected)|
|Other Executing Partner(s):|The Higher Council for Environment and Natural Resources (HCENR) under the Ministry of Environment, Forestry and Physical Development|
|GEF Focal Area(s):|Chemicals and Wastes|
|Type of Report:|Minamata Convention Initial Assessment (MIA)|

### PROJECT FRAMEWORK

- Project Objective: Pre-ratification activities under the Minamata Convention completed to enable policy making and to prioritize areas for future interventions

### Project Outputs

|Project Component|Project Outcomes|GEF Project Financing|Co-financing|
|---|---|---|---|
|Needs assessment of institutional and national capacity to implement the Minamata Convention|Outcome: National capacity improved to ratify and prepare for implementation of the Minamata Convention|$172,000|$104,000|

Output 4: Institutional gaps identified and national coordination on mercury established

Output 2: Review of existing mercury related regulations and identification of needed policy reforms to prepare for implementation of the Minamata Convention completed

Output 3: National mercury profile established based on the initial inventory and key sectors identified for intervention and investment to reduce and where possible eliminate, mercury use, release, and emissions

Output 1.4: Dissemination of information among relevant stakeholder groups

Project ID number will be assigned by GEFSEC and to be entered by Agency in subsequent document submission

Co-financing for enabling activity encouraged but not required;

Enabling Unit: Sep@uIs
---
|Sources of Co-financing|Type of Co-financing|
|---|---|
|Name of Co-financier|Amount ($)|
|GEF Agency_UNIDO|600|
|GEF Agency|Grants|
|Recipient Government|The Higher Council for Environment and Natural Resources|
|Total Co-financing|18,600|

|GEF Financing Resources Requested by Agency, Country, and Programming of Funds (in $)|
|---|
|GEF Trust|Country/Programming|GEF Focal Area|Project Total|
|UNIDO|GEF TF|Republic of Sudan|Chemicals and Wastes|200,000|19,000|219,000|
|Total GEF Resources|200,000|19,000|219,000|
---
PART I: ENABLING ACTIVITY JUSTIFICATION

The Minamata Convention On Mercury is a global treaty to protect human health and the environment from the adverse effects of mercury. The legally binding global instrument was agreed at the fifth session of the Intergovernmental Negotiating Committee in Geneva, Switzerland, 19 January 2013.

The treaty was formally adopted and opened for signature at the Conference of Plenipotentiaries held from October 2013 in Minamata and Kumamoto, Japan; 128 countries had signed the treaty and 12 had ratified it. Sudan became a signatory on 24 September 2014.

The Minamata Convention has a phased approach to reduce mercury use in key industrial sectors and where possible, eliminate mercury. Provisions of the Convention include phase deadlines for supply and trade of mercury added products and manufacturing processes in which mercury or mercury compounds are used. Based on these targets, the Convention is designed to systematically reduce emissions and releases to land and water; and phase out the use of mercury where alternatives exist.

For Sudan to meet obligations under the Convention and ratify the treaty, several barriers must be addressed. These include:

- (a) Institutional barriers: lack of institutional capacity to implement the Convention;
- (b) Policy and legislative frameworks to support Convention provisions;
- (c) Capacity barriers: lack of data on sources of emissions and releases;
- (d) Awareness barriers: low awareness of health risks associated with mercury among government officials; with limited occupational safety mechanisms in place to reduce community exposure to mercury; and
- (e) Technological barriers: lack of knowledge on non-mercury technologies.

With the adoption of the Convention, Sudan will require assistance to formulate and apply sector-wide programs through cost-effective approaches within the context of its national development efforts. Mercury is mainly used in the country in the artisanal and small-scale mining sector. It is also used in dental mercury-amalgam fillings.

In the last years, Sudan has promoted initiatives to tackle the negative impacts of chemicals on human health and the environment. The country is a party to the Stockholm, Rotterdam, and Basel Conventions. Sudan was one of the six countries that participated in the Global Mercury Project implemented by UNIDO from 2002 to 2007. The aim of the initiative was to introduce better and cleaner artisanal and small-scale gold mining (ASGM) processing techniques in order to reduce the impact of the activity on six international water bodies.

UNIDO has also developed in 2009 a sustainable integrated national program for sound chemicals management under the international Strategic Approach to International Chemicals Management (SAICM) initiative.

Despite the efforts made until now, the country has not produced a mercury inventory and no mercury-related projects and regulations have been implemented. Consequently, important baseline data remains largely unknown in Sudan, such as:

- - the quantity and distribution of mercury stocks, supplies, trade and trans-boundary movement;
- - the amount of mercury being used and disposed from various sectors;
---
handling of waste mercury; and the extent of mercury pollution; As sound mercury management is not yet integrated into sustainable development planning; insufficient mechanisms t0 handle hazardous wastes may weaken the basis for effective environmental management in Sudan. The situation tends to aggravate capacity as the country does not have the resources Or the needed to address mercury-related problems and promote the uptake of low mercury mercury free technologies. The development of the Minamata Initial Assessment (MIA) will address these issues by providing the basic and essential information t0 enable policy and strategic decision t0 be made and by assisting the development of plans to identify priority sectors and activities within the country. The request of financial support from the Chemicals and Wastes focal area of the Global Environment Facility (GEF) is justified through investment in enabling activities to assist nations to fulfill essential communication requirements related to the Convention; make informed policy decisions and assist in prioritizing activities proposals and describe the project. Enabling activities have already been developed in Sudan with GEF resources in order t0 assist the country in the implementation of the Stockholm Convention on Persistent Organic Pollutants (POPs). The MIA enabling activities will complement the country efforts to reduce significantly the exposure of harmful chemicals and wastes of global importance to humans and the environment indigenous communities; and their respective roles. The project will Sudan's national fulfill obligations under the applicable Describe also how Minamata Convention and promote effective implementation of its provisions: In order to reach that; the activities proposed will assist the Government and industrial partners to better empower women project design the national operations on well as its emissions; considered understand and t0 increase mercury, implementation): awareness of risks to human and ecosystem health. With the support of GEF; pollution sources can be identified systematically tO select areas for future intervention while well as policy institutional and capacity needs assessment; can assist Sudan identify potential barriers implement and ratify analysis; the Convention; GEF resources will also assist the country t0 disseminate project achievements in the national level and help to leverage international support; as well as investments for additional projects in Sudan to promote sound chemicals management as component of key inclusive and sustainable industrial development. The key stakeholders involved in the project are as follows: UNIDO will act as the GEF Implementing Agency (IA) for the project: The UNIDO project will provide technical advice coordinate and monitor well the project manager activities. Council for Environment and Natural Resources (HCENR) The Higher under the Ministry of Environment; Forestry and Physical Development of Sudan will serve as the national main governmental providing national executing agency and the counterpart leadership: The Minamata Convention focal point in the Ministry will be responsible for the day-to-day compliance with the treaty and its provisions. HCENR will also act as the chair and secretariat of the National Steering Group (NSG) be executed via subcontract t0 HCENR at approximately USD 160.000_ The project will total estimation of the GEF grant and co-financing budget. Please refer t0 Annex for monitoring and breakdown. Budget for the final evaluation included as part of the Scn 213
---
Evaluation table on page 10.

The NSG will be established as an inter-ministerial Steering Group comprised of UNIDO representatives; technical and policy experts from HCENR-relevant ministries and industrial associations to provide overall guidance and coordination for the execution of activities; providing strategic inputs and contributions to project management as needed. All project amendments will be done in accordance with UNIDO rules and regulations and GEF policy GEFIC.39/Inf.3 governmental body in charge of licenses and regulations.

The Ministry of Minerals as the mining sector will collaborate on the project by providing data related to the artisanal gold in ASGM and by supporting the dissemination of information among the stakeholders on the use of mercury. The Ministry of Health will also provide data on the use of mercury in the medical and dental sectors. The Department of Customs, in regulating the entrance of mercury in the Sudanese territory, which has an important role, will provide support in the review of existing mercury-related regulations and in the identification of needed policies. The Gold Miners Union will support the activities related to awareness raising. Civil Society Organizations, including industry associations, academia, and NGOs, will act as a bridge to connect Government institutes, technical experts, and relevant industries to assist in the development and implementation of policies to fulfill obligations under the Convention. This network of associations will liaise with primary mercury extractors and users to increase awareness, share knowledge, and promote technology transfer to reduce mercury use within the enabling activities framework.

An expert team comprised of national and international consultants and technical specialists will be recruited to provide technical support. The team will be selected based on technical expertise to support appropriate policy and gap analysis in the development of the national mercury profile and plan activities for institutional capacity development. The project will not have an impact on indigenous people groups as they are not present in the region where the project will be executed. Please refer to Annex B for flow chart of various stakeholders.

Recognizing that the level of exposure to mercury and its related impacts on human health, women, children, and men might be exposed to different kinds, levels, and frequency of mercury; therefore, gender mainstreaming will be included as part of the project among others by involving women and vulnerable groups at the stakeholder level, in the information sharing and dissemination events. The involvement and participation of women and vulnerable groups will be summarized in the initial inventory report and gender disaggregated data collected to provide a basis for the prioritization, development of sectoral intervention plans, and future projects. Special attention will be paid when inviting stakeholders to participate in the National Steering Group and to awareness-raising workshops. During the recruitment process, female candidates with similar technical qualifications will be encouraged to apply.

SpWs
---
## DESCRIBE THEMIA

This project sets out the activities to support efficient preparation and necessary implementation of the Minamata Convention within the national context. The project will assist Sudan to plan pre-ratification activities while mainstreaming sound mercury management into institutional structures that are fully in line with national priorities.

### ENABLING ACTIVITY AND INSTITUTIONAL FRAMEWORK FOR PROJECT IMPLEMENTATION

The initiative will help the country to collect baseline information on mercury use, emissions, and releases that will serve as input to the design of future interventions required by the treaty; such as the development of a National Implementation Plan that is required by the Conference of Parties within a few years of its entry into force. The treaty is expected to enter into force in two to three years.

The planned activities for output are listed below:

|Output|Activity|
|---|---|
|Institutional gaps identified and national coordination on mercury established|- Activity 1.1.1 Conduct national project coordination
- Activity 1.1.2 Establish an inter-ministerial Steering Group (National Steering Group)
- Activity 1.1.3 Identify institutional capacity gaps and barriers
- Activity 1.1.4 Organize capacity development workshops and trainings
|
|Review of existing mercury related policy reforms to prepare for implementation of the Minamata Convention completed|- Activity 1.2.1 Evaluate existing structures, policies, strategies, laws, and regulations
- Activity 1.2.2 Sensitize policy makers regarding policy gaps and regulations while considering the vulnerabilities of different gender groups
- Activity 1.2.3 Prepare list of needed mercury related policy reforms
|
|National mercury profile established based on the initial inventory and key sectors identified for intervention and investment to reduce mercury use, release, and emissions|- Activity 1.3.1 Conduct national mercury inventory training
- Activity 1.3.2 Collection data for the initial national mercury inventory
- Activity 1.3.3 Draft initial national mercury inventory
- Activity 1.3.4 Identified key sectors for intervention
- Activity 1.3.5 Develop intervention plans
|
|Dissemination of information among relevant stakeholder groups (academia, public and private sectors, and civil society) conducted|- Activity 1.4.1 Develop communication materials taking into account the impacts of mercury on and vulnerability of different gender groups
- Activity 1.4.2 Organize and conduct awareness raising campaigns and workshops adapting location of the events to different gender groups' needs and time
|

Please refer to the attached logical framework in Annex C for specific outputs and their associated indicators, verifications, and assumptions.
---
## DESCRIBE THE PROJECT:

The project is expected to be highly cost-effective as it is fully in line with the goals of Sudan to regulate anthropogenic emissions and releases of mercury in order to protect human health and the environment. With the GEF support, patterns of mercury consumption and release will be assessed to facilitate the design of targeted interventions, which in turn provide global and local benefits. Through reduced emissions to the environment and institutional capacity development and enhancement at the national level, potential contamination risks from the use of mercury-added products will also be minimized. The human resources of the governmental infrastructure will be effectively utilized to ensure cost-effectiveness. Most counterpart and executing agencies involved in the project will be efficiently utilized, and project activities will be carried out by national experts. This will foster an increase in local and national capacity to manage mercury and will contribute to the cost-effectiveness of the project through reduced consultancy fees and travel expenses. This initiative will also serve as a model for other MIA projects under the GEF-6 replenishment period.

## Project Implementation and Execution:

Project implementation and execution are expected to remain at low risk. UNIDO has solid experience promoting environmentally sound management of mercury and plays a lead role in the ASGM sector under the Global Mercury Partnership. UNIDO has experience with enabling activities through the Stockholm Convention and extensive National Implementation Plans (NIPs) and NIP updates. Lessons learned and experience gained by UNIDO in the development of mercury-related building initiatives on POPs are comparative advantages to the implementation of the project. The local and regional presence of UNIDO in the field will also help ensure the smooth development of project activities. In addition, HCENR has experience working with UNIDO-GEF projects. Recently, HCENR successfully led the execution of the project entitled "Enabling Activities to Review and Update the National Implementation Plan for the Stockholm Convention on POPs," showing the capability and competence to take over the execution of the MIA.

## Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E):

Monitoring and evaluation for this project will rely on several levels of review. Overall M&E will be conducted by UNIDO through annual quality control and feedback. A Steering Group, including the main project stakeholders, will meet annually to review the work plan, assess progress against targets as indicated in the Project Results Framework, review interim and final reports, assess any gaps or weaknesses, and make appropriate adaptive management decisions based on progress and achievements. The work plan for year two will be based on the results achieved in the first year, including associated budget allocations, in agreement with the GEF and UNIDO's rules and guidelines and GEF Council Documents GEFIC. 39/09 and GEFIC.39/Inf.03.

UNIDO's office in Sudan will assist and participate in monitoring and evaluation visits as needed. In order to reinforce oversight over this project, monthly meetings will be promoted between UNIDO and representatives of the national governments through teleconference to discuss the status of the project, the next steps to be taken, and issues that can be faced in the field. The final evaluation, to be conducted by an independent evaluator, will be arranged by the UNIDO project manager with support from UNIDO's Evaluation Group and submitted to the donor within 90 days of project end. Please see below for a summary of the monitoring and evaluation plan, as well as the related budget breakdown.
---
Programmatic MRE: the main executing partner; HCENR, Will be responsible for day-to-day management and execution of the project, reporting semi-annually to UNIDO. Progress of activities and outputs against the targets and desired outcomes will be assessed bi-annually by the executing partners means of verification and impact indicators using the measurement explained in the Project Results Framework.

Financial Monitoring: All project costs will be accounted for and documented. Financial reports will be required from the executing agency according to UNIDO standard accounting procedures.

According to UNIDO, follow-up and the Monitoring and Evaluation policy of the GEF studies like Country Portfolio Evaluations and Thematic Evaluations can be initiated or studies; All project partners and contractors are obliged to (a) make available reports and other documentation related to the project and (b) facilitate interviews with staff involved in the project activities.

Context clause: The present project is governed by the provisions of the Standard Legal Basic Cooperation Agreement between the Government of the Republic of Sudan and UNIDO; signed on 8 March 1988.

|Monitoring and Evaluation table|
|---|
|Budget (USD)|MAE activity|Time|Cash (USD)|In Kind|
|Start-Up workshop|Within months|report project start|
|Project review by NSG|Month 2|at the end of year|
|Project review by NSG|Month 24|at the end of the project *|
|Terminal evaluation|At project closure|10,000|4,600|
|Total M&E cost| |10,000|4,600|

*Funded by Project Management Costs

EXPLANATION: Not applicable.

DEVIATIONS FROM TYPICAL COST RANGES (WHERE APPLICABLE)

PART: APPROVAL/ENDORSEMENT BY GEF OPERATIONAL FOCAL POINTS AND GEF AGENCIES

RECORD OF ENDORSEMENT OF GEF OPERATIONAL FOCAL POINT(S) ON BEHALF OF THE GOVERNMENT(S): (Please attach the Operational Focal Point endorsement letter(s) with this template).

DATE (Month; day, year)

NAME POSITION MINISTRY

Dr. El Khitma El Awad Senior Researcher HIGHER COUNCIL FOR ENVIRONMENT AND NATURAL RESOURCES 10/13/2015

GFF
---
|DATE SIGNED|NATIONAL FOCAL POINT NOTIFICATION|DATE OF NOTIFICATION (MM/DD/YYYY)|
|---|---|---|
|MINAMATA CONVENTION|09/24/2014|PROF: HAIDER ALSAFI MOHAMED ALI C: GEF AGENCY(IES) CERTIFICATION|

|Project Contact|Agency Coordinator|Date|Signature|Telephone|E-mail Address|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|
| | | |Agency name|Mr. Philippe R. Savigliano|Mr. Riccardo Scholtes|+43 5082 126026|RSavigliano@unido.org|

GEF policies encompass all managed trust funds, namely: GEFTF, IDCF, and SCCF
---
# 111

# 18

# 888

# 1

# 1

# 11

# 88

# Jo1

# 1

# 8888

# 11

# 8818

# 11

# 1888888

# 811

# J3883

# 1IL1

# 11828

# 5

# 1

# HL

# 111

# 3

# jU111

# H

# H

# 131il

# Hl

# L111H

# 18

# Jk8

# 2

# 11

# 6

# 1L1

# 1

# 13

# I8
---
6H
L11
1
8Hu
{
HV3
3
1
31
1
J
1id
1
2[
8
1
8
14
]
1suonppjossV |puusnpuvsuoppziup6uo haposWNJ
L
6
1
---
# Yu

L
8
H1
U#
12
7L
|HhH
8
Hl
1
141
3
1
08W
Nw[1
4L
3|
1LH
1I[4Jp
L3
1612
311V
11
311
HI
[L#H
14
1[l
|
8
2Jl
4@
H1
12H1
1
118
1{
1H
31
1
1
Lhihw1
3
8
]HW
1
213
8{
1
21
HWL3
]8
Uli
1324H
7
LH2
L3
11
J1
1
2U
611
J1
12
---
11
[11
813
1
]1
91
8(
6
0{
[
|U
L0
13
81L
1I01
03
H1
1{4
21
13
1
1L
1H
87
1
41
1
1
HH1
1HH
10
HhHH
L11
#I!
H]
I
111
0
334
1
J
JHh4H8
1
3
---
NO_CONTENT_HERE
---
Republic of Sudan

Ministry of Environment, Natural Resources & Physical Development

Higher Council for Environment & Natural Resources

General Secretariat HCENR

Date: 13/10/2015

Mr. Philippc R. Scholtes

Managing Director of Programme Development and Technical Cooperation Division (PTC)

UNIDO GEF Focal Point

Vienna International Centre

P.O. Box 300

4-400 Vienna, Austria

Tel: +43 260 260

269 26 69

Fax: +43

Convention Initial Assessment in the Republic of Sudan

Subject: Endorsement for Minamata

In my capacity as GEF Focal Point for Sudan as of 30/8/2015, confirm that the above project proposal:

(a) is in accordance with my government national priorities as identified in National Adaptation Plan of relevant global conventions; with relevant actions; and our commitment to and discuss stakeholders, including the global environmental convention focal points.

I am pleased to endorse the preparation of the above project proposal with the support of the GEF. The proposal will be prepared and implemented by the Higher Council for Environment and Natural Resources (HCENR) of the Ministry of Environment, Forests, and Physical Development. If approved, the total financing (from GEF TF, LDCF, or SCCF) being requested for this project is US$ 219,000 inclusive of project preparation fees, management services associated with the total GEF grant, and if any, for project cycle.

|Source of Funds|GEF Focal Area|Amount (US$)|
|---|---|---|
|Total Preparation Project Fee|GEF TF|200,000.00|
|UNIDO Chemicals| |19,000.00|
|Total GEF| |219,000.00|

WHERE THE SOURCE OF FUNDING IS GEF TRUST FUNDING ONLY (I.E. EXCLUDING LDCF AND/OR SCCF) AND THE FOCAL AREA FALLS UNDER THE STAR MODEL INCLUDE THE FOLLOWING: allocations in GEF-6 as defined in the System of Transparent Allocation of Resources (STAR).

Sincerely

Dr. ElW4d

Sudan GEF Focal Point

Higher Council for Environment and Natural Resources (HCENR)

Via

Tel: +249 183 784279

Fax: +249 183 787617

P.O. Box: 10488 Khartoum
---
NO_CONTENT_HERE
---
Mc Republic of Sudan

Higher Council for Environment Natural Resources

Central Secretariat

15 April 2015

Mr. Juergen Hierold

GEF Coordinator

Vienna

UNIDO International Center

Wagramer Strasse 5, P.O. Box 300

1400 Vienna, Austria

Subject: Co-financing of the UNIDO-Global Environment Facility Project "Minamata Convention Initial Assessment of SUDAN" by Higher Council for Environment and Natural Resources (HCENR) SUDAN

Dear Mr. Hierold

The Higher Council for Environment and Natural Resources (HCENR) represented by Prof. Haider Elsafi Mohamed Ali Shapo, Secretary General, hereby confirms its commitment to the above-mentioned Project. The HCENR is contributing an amount of US$ 100,000 (one hundred thousand US dollars) in-kind.

This amount which the HCENR is contributing to the achievement of the overall goals of the aforementioned project refers to in-kind contributions related to efforts to strengthen national capacity to fulfill obligations under the Minamata Convention On Mercury and promote effective implementation of its provisions.

We understand that this amount will be managed by The HCENR and will not represent any additional cash contribution to the project budget.

Please contact us should you have any questions in this regard.

Yours sincerely

Prof. Haider Elsafi Mohamed Ali Shapo

Secretary General Resources (HCENR)

Higher Council for Environment and Natural Resources

+7841 Khartoum

Tel: +249 8209

Fax: +249 70279

P.O. Box 133

Email: financomronnsev@yahoo.com
---
NO_CONTENT_HERE